---
layout: post
title: I'm Transitioning from Conda to Pixi
date: 2025-06-27 02:35:00
description: The python packaging system is insane.
tags: math, python, pixi
categories: personal
giscus_comments: true
---

**Warning**: I'm not really making a point here, I'm mostly just venting.

# The Problem

Surely this must be a common problem among computational mathematicians. You
teach a class with a computational component, and you want to distribute code to
your students. The average student in these classes at best has exposure to
MATLAB, or maybe Mathematica. But, the reality is that an increasing majority of
mathematical research is being done in Python, not to mention that it's
obviously massively applicable to industry. I like my students. I want them to
succeed. I want them to learn and use Python.

Naively, I write some nice Python code. Clean, readable, beautiful
visualizations. I hand them the files. With wonder, curiosity, and hope, they
say "Cool! How do I run this?".

Isn't it insane that I have to snuff out the life in eyes on step one?

Okay, I could use something like Google Colab. I suppose I understand why so
many people in my field are comfortable with notebooks, what with that being the
easiest way to run a simple script. Otherwise, I'm staring down the barrel of
explaining 1) how to get Python on your system to begin with and why that
shouldn't be something like yout system's package manager, 3) why, for our
scientific computing ecosystem, we have to use packages off of conda-forge
instead of PyPI (mostly), and 3) conda itself. Each of those are uncomfortable
conversations when I'm trying to convince them to use a different tool that's
basically a 1-click install. Compounding the problem, sometimes I have to begin
with explaining what a terminal is.

Well, Pixi doesn't exactly fix this. I should just wrap up this post give them
notebooks. But, I hate notebooks. They're great for exploration, or tutorials.
But, their format inherently encourages bad programming practices and students,
who haven't seen anything else, end up writing monster notebooks. I debugged
multiple such specimens during my PhD years, trying to strip out the critical
pieces for my own research. I want them to see better ways to do things.

# Pixi

[Pixi](https://pixi.sh/latest/) is a new(-ish) package manager that operates off
of conda-forge. That's critical for scientific computing, given how many
dependencies in our field are enormous C/C++/Fortran libraries. PyPI is great
for Python packages, but it explicitly isn't designed for such projects.
Otherwise, I would happily be using [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/).

Why not just use Conda? I actually don't have big problems with it, especially
after mamba mostly solved the performance issues. However, it's far from a
seamless experience; there's a lot of intermediate steps and manual intervention
required to set up a new enviornment. Not to mention it drapes itself all over
your system and paths, which causes problems for other tools. For example,
[Firedrake](https://www.firedrakeproject.org/), an excellent finite element
library, specifically calls out conda as an anti-requirement. Furthermore, most
people I know just ad-hoc install packages into enviornments. More often than
note, I find existing `env.yml` to be outdated, or just plain wrong.

In contrast, Pixi is faster, doesn't pull any path shenanigans (it's just a
binary), and is specifically designed to integrate into workspaces. If I want to
pass some code to students, I toss them repository with the files, a `pixi.toml`
+ `pixi.lock`, and a README with a command or two.

Recently, I took steps to completely clean my system of Conda (unsurprisingly
annoying, but therapeutic), and now I'm using Pixi exclusively for my research.
I'm happy to say, atleast in PDE (FEniCS) and neural network land (PyTorch \&
JAX), it has been a smooth transition. I'm very much looking forward to the
completion of rattler-build, so that it's easier to push packages to conda-forge
as well.
