---
title: "Computing Eigenvalue Sensitivities for Sensitivity Analysis of the Information Gain in Bayesian Linear Inverse Problems"
collection: talks
type: "Seminar Talk"
permalink: /talks/2022-09-26-amgss
venue: "Applied Math Graduate Student Seminar at NCSU"
date: 2022-09-26
location: "Raleigh, North Carolina"
---

**Abstract**: We consider sensitivity analysis of Bayesian inverse problems with
respect to modeling uncertainties. To this end, we consider sensitivity analysis
of the information gain, as measured by the Kullback-Leibler divergence from the
posterior to the prior. This choice provides a principled approach that
leverages key structures within the Bayesian inverse problem. Also, the
information gain reduces to the Bayesian D-optimal design criterion in the case
of linear Gaussian inverse problems. However, the derivatives of the information
gain are not simple to compute, nor are finite differences always possible let
alone scalable. To solve half the puzzle, in this talk we present the method of
computing eigenvalue sensitivities for implicitly defined linear operators
appearing in PDE-constrained optimization problems. Specifically, we consider
eigenvalue sensitivities of the so-called data misfit Hessian and its
preconditioned counterpart. We start with simple examples and work our way up to
the expressions in the information gain. Our approach relies on adjoint based
methods for gradient and Hessian computation. The resulting expressions for the
sensitivities will be exact and can be computed in a scalable manner.
